This is Kevin Jones of Pluralsight.
Welcome to the Writing Servlets chapter of the Java Web Fundamentals class.
A servlet is the fundamental component of a web application written in Java.
In this class, we'll explain how to write servlets,
we'll take a look at the servlet interface,
at the GenericServlet class, and at the HttpServlet class.
Every servlet implements a base interface called servlet.
This interface describes a few things about the servlet.
It describes in particular how to configure the servlet,
and it also describes the servlet's lifecycle.
The lifecycle consists of three things.
We need to initialize the servlet, we need to destroy the servlet,
and in between the servlet has a service method.
As we will see, it's this service method that does all the work of the servlet.
And that's where we'll be spending most of our time in this chapter.
Notice that the service method takes two parameters,
a ServletRequest object and a ServletResponse object.
The ServletRequest object will contain details of the incoming request,
such as request headers and any request parameters,
and the ServletResponse object we use to generate the outgoing response.
Down this we'll send any data that the client needs to see.
Notice that these two parameters are protocol-agnostic, i.e.
they're not tied to HTTP or FTP or any other protocol.
Servlets are typically used for HTTP.
When the interface was first designed,
the idea was that a servlet could be used for any type of service,
again, such as FTP.
The other two methods on the interface, getServletConfig and getServletInfo,
these are there to provide configuration information for the servlet.
This configuration information is passed through the web.xml file and
could be things such as the database connection string,
or maybe user information that the servlet uses for security.
GetServletInfo just provides a string that could be,
for example, the name of the servlet or maybe a copyright notice.
While we could implement the servlet interface directly ourselves,
we tend not to do that.
The library provides a couple of helper classes,
the first of which is GenericServlet.
As I've just said, the servlets were designed to be protocol-agnostic,
and GenericServlet is another step in that direction.
There's no protocol-specific implementation in this class at all.
It's just there's an abstract base class that
protocol-specific classes can derive from.
The protocol-specific class we care about is HttpServlet.
So HttpServlet extends GenericServlet.
The HttpServlet class provides us with several helper methods
to make it easier for us to work with HTTP.
For example, there's a doGet method, a doPost method,
a doPut method, that correspond to the HTTP verbs.
The way the HttpServlet class works is it provides a
specific implementation of the service method.
As you can see,
this method takes a ServletRequest object and a ServletResponse object.
These are in fact HttpServletRequest and HttpServletResponse.
The HttpServlet class casts the two incoming parameters to be the correct type,
i.e.
HttpServletRequest and HttpServletResponse.
It then calls another service method that takes the
parameters of the correct type.
This service method looks inside the request object by
calling a helper method called getMethod.
This returns the current HTTP method,
which will typically be GET or POST from a web browser.
Depending on the method it gets back, whether it's GET or POST,
it then calls a further helper method called doGet or doPost.
The code for these methods is not shown here,
but the default implementation of these methods simply
returns an error code back to the browser.
The error code return is dependent on the version of HTTP,
whether we are running 1.0 or 1.1.
If the protocol being used is HTTP 1.1,
then these methods return an error code of Method Not Allowed. Otherwise, they return an error code of Bad Request.